FinPilot AI — Complete Project Development Journey (Start to End Summary)
Introduction

FinPilot AI is an AI-powered Financial Wellness Assistant developed as part of the IBM University Engagement Project, focusing on the application of Agentic AI using IBM Cloud and IBM watsonx Orchestrate.

The objective of the project was to create an intelligent financial assistant that helps users understand their financial situation, improve money management habits, and receive personalized financial guidance. Instead of acting as a simple chatbot that provides generic answers, the goal was to build an AI system capable of understanding user requirements, analyzing financial information, and providing context-aware recommendations.

The project combines an AI agent developed using IBM watsonx Orchestrate with a modern React-based web application to create an interactive and user-friendly financial wellness platform.

1. Problem Identification and Project Planning

The first step of the project was identifying the problem area. Personal financial management is a common challenge for many individuals. People often struggle with budgeting, saving money, managing expenses, understanding debt, and planning future financial goals.

Existing financial tools often provide static information or require users to manually analyze their financial situation. Many users lack access to personalized financial guidance that considers their specific income, expenses, savings, debt, and goals.

Based on this problem, the idea of FinPilot AI was developed.

The main objectives of the project were:

Provide personalized financial guidance.
Help users analyze their financial health.
Assist users in creating better budgeting and saving strategies.
Provide an interactive conversational AI experience.
Demonstrate the use of Agentic AI in a real-world application.

The project architecture was planned around three major components:

Artificial Intelligence Agent
Web Application Interface
Cloud Deployment Infrastructure
2. Technology Selection

After defining the project objective, the required technologies were selected.

For artificial intelligence capabilities, IBM watsonx Orchestrate was selected because it provides an environment for building and deploying AI agents with conversational capabilities.

The AI agent was configured using the GPT-OSS 120B model available in the IBM watsonx environment. The model provides natural language understanding, reasoning capabilities, and the ability to generate personalized responses based on user conversations.

For the frontend application, React with Vite was selected because it provides a fast and scalable framework for building modern web applications.

Tailwind CSS was used for styling and creating a professional fintech-style interface. Additional UI libraries and animation tools were used to improve user experience.

IBM Bob was used as an AI development assistant during the coding process. It helped with project architecture planning, generating frontend components, debugging issues, and improving the overall development workflow.

The final technology stack included:

IBM watsonx Orchestrate — AI agent development and deployment
GPT-OSS 120B Model — AI reasoning and response generation
IBM Cloud — Cloud infrastructure
React + Vite — Frontend development
Tailwind CSS — UI design
Netlify — Web application deployment
GitHub — Source code management and documentation
3. AI Agent Development Using IBM watsonx Orchestrate

The next stage was creating the FinPilot AI agent using IBM watsonx Orchestrate.

The agent was designed as a financial wellness assistant whose purpose is to provide educational financial guidance and help users improve their understanding of personal finance.

The agent instructions were carefully designed to define:

Agent identity
Response behavior
Scope limitations
Communication style
Responsible AI guidelines

The agent was configured to assist users with topics such as:

Budget management
Saving strategies
Expense control
Emergency fund planning
Financial goal setting
Basic financial literacy

Responsible AI behavior was also considered. The agent was instructed not to provide unsupported investment advice, legal advice, or professional financial recommendations. Instead, it focuses on educational guidance and encourages informed decision-making.

After creation, the agent was tested with multiple prompts to verify its behavior.

Testing included:

Financial questions
Budgeting scenarios
Saving-related queries
General conversation tests
Out-of-scope questions

Based on testing results, the agent instructions were refined to ensure that the AI maintained its role as a financial wellness assistant.

4. Frontend Application Development

After the AI agent was prepared, the next phase was developing the FinPilot AI website.

The frontend was built using React and Vite.

The objective was to create a professional financial technology interface rather than a basic chatbot webpage.

The website was designed with a modern glassmorphism-based UI approach, including:

Smooth animations
Responsive layouts
Interactive cards
Modern dashboard elements
Professional navigation

The application consisted of several major sections.

Landing Page

The landing page introduces FinPilot AI and explains its purpose.

It includes:

Project introduction
Features
Benefits of AI financial assistance
User-focused design elements

The purpose of this section was to provide users with an understanding of the product before interacting with the AI assistant.

Financial Assessment Module

A financial assessment system was developed where users can enter their financial details.

The assessment collects information such as:

Monthly income
Monthly expenses
Savings
Debt
Financial goals

Based on this information, the system generates financial insights such as:

Financial health score
Savings rate
Expense analysis
Basic recommendations

This module provides users with a structured way to understand their current financial position.

Financial Dashboard

A dashboard interface was developed to display financial information in a visually understandable format.

The dashboard presents:

Financial score
Income information
Expense information
Savings status
Debt overview
AI recommendations

The dashboard transforms raw financial information into simple visual insights.

5. IBM watsonx Orchestrate Integration

One of the most important parts of the project was connecting the AI agent with the frontend website.

IBM watsonx Orchestrate provides a Web Chat integration feature that allows an AI agent to be embedded into external applications.

The integration process involved:

Generating the Web Chat embed configuration from IBM watsonx Orchestrate.
Obtaining required configuration details:
Orchestration ID
Agent ID
Environment ID
Host URL
Creating a dedicated WatsonChat component in the React application.
Adding the IBM wxO loader script.
Initializing the Orchestrate chat interface inside the website.

After integration, users could directly interact with the FinPilot AI agent from the website without leaving the application.

This transformed the project from a simple frontend dashboard into an interactive AI-powered financial assistant.

6. UI Improvements and Product Refinement

After the core functionality was completed, the focus shifted toward improving the overall user experience.

The interface was refined by adding:

Better spacing and layouts
Improved animations
Glass-style cards
Better section organization
Enhanced AI chat presentation

The AI assistant section was improved to make the chatbot feel like the central feature of the application rather than a small support widget.

Additional elements were introduced:

Assistant introduction section
Suggested financial topics
Responsible AI disclaimer
Improved chatbot container design

These improvements helped create a more polished and professional product experience.

7. Testing and Debugging

After development, the application was tested thoroughly.

Testing included:

Frontend Testing

The website was checked for:

Navigation functionality
Form submission
Dashboard updates
Responsive design
User interface issues
AI Agent Testing

The AI agent was tested with different conversations to verify:

Financial guidance quality
Agent behavior
Scope control
Responsible responses
Build Testing

The application was tested using production build commands.

The project successfully passed:

npm run build

with no major errors.

8. Version Control and Documentation

After completing development, the project was uploaded to GitHub.

The repository contains:

Complete React source code
Configuration files
Documentation
Project presentation materials

GitHub was used for maintaining project history, sharing source code, and providing transparency about the development process.

9. Deployment

The final step was deploying the application publicly.

The React application was deployed using Netlify.

The deployment process involved:

Preparing the production build.
Uploading the application.
Configuring deployment settings.
Testing the live website.

The final deployed application allows users to:

Explore the FinPilot AI interface.
Complete financial assessment.
View financial insights.
Interact with the IBM watsonx Orchestrate AI assistant.
10. Final Outcome

The final outcome of the project is FinPilot AI — an AI-powered Financial Wellness Assistant.

The project demonstrates how Agentic AI can be integrated into a practical application to solve real-world problems.

The completed system combines:

IBM watsonx Orchestrate AI Agent
GPT-OSS 120B model
React-based web application
Financial assessment system
Interactive dashboard
Embedded conversational AI

Through this project, the goal was achieved: creating a functional AI-powered financial assistant that provides personalized financial guidance through an intuitive and modern user experience.

The project also demonstrates the complete lifecycle of an AI application:

Problem Identification → AI Agent Development → Frontend Development → Integration → Testing → Deployment

FinPilot AI represents how modern Agentic AI systems can be applied to create intelligent, accessible, and user-focused digital assistants.
